Add documentation for metric ui and prometheus (#2769)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/prometheusmetrics.md

---
layout: default
title: Using Prometheus to visualize metrics
nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/prometheusmetrics/
---

# Using Prometheus to visualize metrics
Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

> Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can visualize metrics data from the open-source [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) monitoring solution and from log data aggregated within OpenSearch, allowing you to analyze and correlate data across logs and traces as well as metrics. Previously, OpenSearch Observability allowed you to ingest and visualize logs and traces only from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

Reviewer: Do we need to say that you can _ingest_ and visualize metrics data from Prometheus? 
...allowing you to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, _and_ metrics. 
Previously, you could  ingest and visualize only logs and traces from your monitored environments.

## Creating a connection to Prometheus

You can view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards by first creating a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin. 

> ![Prometheus and Metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metricsgif.gif)

Reviewer: If we have an image here, we need to describe it. You could pull this image above "Creating", just explain it. Like, 
The following image shows the process of pulling in metrics and viewing them in the Dashboard." (Something like that.)

> ### Configuring a Prometheus data source connection to OpenSearch

Reviewer: This looks good with no bullets. :)

```
bin/opensearch-keystore add-file plugins.query.federation.datasources.config datasources.json
```

If you are updating the keystore during runtime, refresh the keystore using following API command:

```bash
POST /_nodes/reload_secure_settings
{
  "secure_settings_password":""
  
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Metrics collected from Prometheus are displayed in the **Observability** application under **Metrics analytics**. For further information, see the [Prometheus Connector](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/prometheus_connector.rst) GitHub page.

## Prometheus PPL queries

You can define [Piped Processing Language]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) (PPL) queries against metrics collected by Prometheus. The following example shows a metric-selecting query with specific dimensions:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```

## Creating visualizations based on metrics

> You can create visualizations based on metrics collected by your OpenSearch cluster in the in the new **Metrics Analytics** application of OpenSearch Dashboards, shown in the following image. 

Reviewer: How do I create it?

Author: Added steps

> ![Metrics UI example 1]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics1.png)

Reviewer: I would remove this as it doesn't add much value. Or describe it some more?

After creating a visualization, you can save it in the **Metrics analytics** section of the **Observability** application, as seen in the following image.

> ![Metrics UI example 2]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

Reviewer: How do I save it? The image doesn't show me how to save it.

Author: Added steps

> Additionally, you can save a custom visualization created with [Event analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/event-analytics/) to fit your needs, as seen in the following image.

Reviewer: What I am looking at? The screen needs to be described for accessibility.

Author: added additional details and steps

---
layout: default

> title: Prometheus SQL and Metrics Analytics Observability plugin

Author: I like it :)

nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/prometheusmetrics/
---

# Prometheus SQL and Metrics Analytics Observability plugin
Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can use two new additional features within the **Observability** application in OpenSearch Dashboards: the Metrics UI for visualization, and connecting to Prometheus to gather metrics.

![Prometheus and Metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metricsgif.gif)

> ## Metrics Analytics UI

Reviewer: I think we should focus less on the UI and talk about what the user can do with the Prometheus connection. In other words, I'm not sure showing this adds any value.

Author: the metics section here also has new features so I do think these sections add value

Reviewer: What new features? For accessibility we need to describe what we are demonstrating in this image. If it's just to point out that there is a new UI, I don't think we need it. We just need to make sure we are telling the users how to perform their task using the new UI.

Author: ok, let me look and see if I can re-work it

Author: made a revision

> Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can visualize metrics data from the open-source [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) monitoring solution as well as from log data aggregated within OpenSearch, unlocking new observability capabilities that allow you to analyze and correlate data across logs and traces as well as metrics. Previously, the OpenSearch observability plugin only allowed you to ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform root cause analysis.

Reviewer 2: Are we capitalizing plugin names? Actually, in the spirit of doing away with "plugins", it looks like other Observability topics are dropping the plugin and just referring to it as Observability. Check me on this.

Author: I think that's correct. I have re-phrased.

> ![Prometheus and Metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metricsgif.gif)

Author: I think I have a good idea for this and am going to move it down as well as replacing a couple of images with it. Let me know what you think.

The Metrics Analytics UI is a new component in the **Observability** application for OpenSearch Dashboards, as seen in the following image.

![Metrics UI example 1]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics1.png)

You can view visualizations from created metrics in the **Metrics analytics** section of the **Observability** application as seen in the following image.

> ![Metrics UI example 2]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

Reviewer: Again, "Saving visualizations..."

> You can create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch via the SQL plugin in order to view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer 3: Can we use another word besides "via" here?

> You can create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin in order to view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer 2: "in order to" can be boiled down to "to". Even better, replace with "and". Does that read all right?

"You can create a connection from Prometheus to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin and view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards."

> You can create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin in order to view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Author: Creating the connection is described in the next heading, so I think it would make sense for the heading to be an H3

> Upon selection of a metric, the **Metrics explorer** will create a visualization for the selected metric to be displayed, as seen in the following image.

Author: Prometheus AND other metrics will be displayed here, so it's not specific to Prometheus, hence the more generalized language.

Additionally, you can save a visualization created with [Event analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/event-analytics/) as seen in the following image.

Only queries that include a Time Series visualization and stats/span can be saved as a metric.
{: .note }

![Metrics UI example 3]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics3.png)

> ## Prometheus connection

Reviewer: "Creating a connection to Prometheus" - maybe this should be the first section?

Author: yeah I'm cool with that

> No authentication:

Reviewer 3: These may look better as subheadings.

You can create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch via the SQL plugin in order to view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards.

![Prometheus example 1]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics4.png)

Upon selection of a metric, the **Metrics explorer** will create a visualization for the selected metric to be displayed, as seen in the following image.

![Prometheus example 2]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics5.png)

> ### Configuring a Prometheus data source connection to OpenSearch

Reviewer: Should be an H2?

> In order to configure a connection to Prometheus for metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards, you will need to create a file on your OpenSearch nodes named `datasources.json` containing the Prometheus data source settings. The following examples demonstrate the various Prometheus data source configurations using different authentication methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure a connection to Prometheus for metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards, create a file on your OpenSearch nodes named `datasources.json` containing the Prometheus data source settings. The following examples demonstrate the various Prometheus data source configurations using different authentication methods:
```

> - No authentication:

Reviewer: I don't think we need bullet points here - it should flow by using normal paragraphs

>    ```json

Reviewer: Do we need copy commands here?

Author: No, we just use does for API calls where as these are configuration examples.

        "prometheus.auth.type" : "basicauth",
        "prometheus.auth.username" : "admin",
        "prometheus.auth.password" : "admin"
    }
}]
```

> AWSSigV4 authentication:

Reviewer 2: AWS SigV4

```json
[{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:8080",
        "prometheus.auth.type" : "awssigv4",
        "prometheus.auth.region" : "us-east-1",
        "prometheus.auth.access_key" : "{{accessKey}}"
        "prometheus.auth.secret_key" : "{{secretKey}}"
    }
}]
```

> After configuring Prometheus in the `datasources.json` file, run the following command to load the configuration into the OpenSearch keystore. The configuration is securely stored as is contains credential information.

Reviewer 2: The configuration is securely stored **as is contains** credential information.

I'm not figuring this out.

Author: reworded for clarity

- AWSSigV4 authentication:

   ```json
   [{
       "name" : "my_prometheus",
       "connector": "prometheus",
       "properties" : {
           "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:8080",
           "prometheus.auth.type" : "awssigv4",
           "prometheus.auth.region" : "us-east-1",
           "prometheus.auth.access_key" : "{{accessKey}}"
           "prometheus.auth.secret_key" : "{{secretKey}}"
       }
   }]
   ```

> After entering your Prometheus configuration into the `datasources.json` file, run the following command to load the configuration into the OpenSearch keystore. This is securely stored as is contains credential information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After configuring Prometheus in the `datasources.json` file, run the following command to load the configuration into the OpenSearch keystore. The configuration is securely stored as is contains credential information.
```

```
bin/opensearch-keystore add-file plugins.query.federation.datasources.config datasources.json
```

> If you are updating the keystore during runtime, refresh the keystore with the following API command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are updating the keystore during runtime, refresh the keystore using the following API command:
```

> Below is an example of a [Piped Processing Language]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) (PPL) query using a Prometheus connection in OpenSearch. This example demonstrates a metric selecting query with specific dimensions:

Reviewer 2: a metric-selecting query.

```bash
POST /_nodes/reload_secure_settings
{
  "secure_settings_password":""
  
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Metrics collected from Prometheus will now be displayed in the **Observability** application under **Metrics analytics**. For further information, see the [Prometheus Connector](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/prometheus_connector.rst) GitHub page.

Reviewer: will now be displayed --> are displayed

> The Metrics Analytics UI is a new component in the **Observability** application for OpenSearch Dashboards, as seen in the following image, that allows you to create visualizations based on metrics collected by your OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Can we call this, "Creating visualizations based on metrics", then say, You can create visualizations based on metrics collected by your OpenSearch cluster in the in the new Metrics Analytics application of OpenSearch Dashboards. The following image shows .... 
```

> ![Metrics UI example 1]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics1.png)

Reviewer: Saving visualizations? Although, saving is part of creating, so not sure if it would need to be called out here.

Author: It's more like, you can view a simple visualization, but you can also configure it with your own needs and then save the custom visualization. Let me see if I can explain that better.

### Prometheus PPL queries

> Below is an example of a [Piped Processing Language]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) (PPL) query using a Prometheus connection in OpenSearch. This example demonstrates a metric selecting query with specific dimensions:

Reviewer: Do we need to provide a brief intro sentence here on what a Prometheus PPL query is or why you would need it?

Author: PPL querys are not unique to Prometheus, and I also linked to relevant documentation on PPL with OpenSearch

Reviewer: Right, but why is it relevant to point out here? There must be something unique about it?

Author: it's relevant because being able to use PPL queries against Prometheus metrics is a new ability that you used to not be able to do. So this lets the user know that it is possable to use PPL with the Prometheus connection.

> Only queries that include a Time Series visualization and stats/span can be saved as a metric.

Reviewer 3: Does "Time Series" need to be capitalized?

> Additionally, you can save a visualization created with [Event analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/event-analytics/) as seen in the following image.

Reviewer: But if there are two ways to save you might want to create a procedure under creating with the instructions for how to save.

Author: Ok, I tried to clarify the difference here. Let me know what you think.

---
layout: default
title: Prometheus and Metrics Analytics
nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/prometheusmetrics/
---

# Prometheus and Metrics Analytics
Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can ingest and visualize metrics data from the open-source [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) monitoring solution and from log data aggregated within OpenSearch, allowing you to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics. Previously, you could ingest and visualize only logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

> The following image shows the process of pulling in metrics and viewing them in **Observability**.

Reviewer: Can we say something like, ".... shows the process of pulling in metrics ingested through Prometheus and visualizing them in a dashboard." That way we get away from using Observability as a thing that we have to qualify.

    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:9090",
        "prometheus.auth.type" : "basicauth",
        "prometheus.auth.username" : "admin",
        "prometheus.auth.password" : "admin"
    }
}]
```

AWS SigV4 authentication:

```json
[{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:8080",
        "prometheus.auth.type" : "awssigv4",
        "prometheus.auth.region" : "us-east-1",
        "prometheus.auth.access_key" : "{{accessKey}}"
        "prometheus.auth.secret_key" : "{{secretKey}}"
    }
}]
```

After configuring Prometheus in the `datasources.json` file, run the following command to load the configuration into the OpenSearch keystore. The configuration is securely stored in the keystore, as it contains sensitive credential information.

```
bin/opensearch-keystore add-file plugins.query.federation.datasources.config datasources.json
```

If you are updating the keystore during runtime, refresh the keystore using following API command:

```bash
POST /_nodes/reload_secure_settings
{
  "secure_settings_password":""
  
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Metrics collected from Prometheus are displayed in the **Observability** application under **Metrics analytics**. For further information, see the [Prometheus Connector](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/prometheus_connector.rst) GitHub page.

Reviewer: Is this appropriate here? I mean, as soon as we make the connection, are metrics displayed in the observability > metrics analysis window? If so, this would be a good time for a screen shot. :)

Author: yes this is accurate. I have a ss of this, so I'll add it back

## Prometheus PPL queries

You can define [Piped Processing Language]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) (PPL) queries against metrics collected by Prometheus. The following example shows a metric-selecting query with specific dimensions:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```

## Creating visualizations based on metrics

> You can create visualizations based on metrics collected by your OpenSearch cluster in the in the new **Metrics Analytics** section of the **Observability** application in OpenSearch Dashboards. To create a visualization, choose the metrics you would like to include from the list under **Available Metrics**. These visualizations will be displayed in the **Metrics Analytics** section of **Observability** as seen in the following image. 

Reviewer: in the in the

![Metrics UI example 2]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

After creating a visualization, you can save it with the following steps:

> 1. Select **Save**.

Reviewer: From the ___window.... (I'm unsure of the context of where you select save.)

Author: re-worded for context

> 2. You are then prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**.

Reviewer: "When prompted for a Custom operationa.... , choose one of the available options."

> 3. Choose one of the provided options.

Reviewer: Remove, as it should be combined with step 2.

> 4. Enter name values under the **Metric Name** fields.

Reviewer: Are there any tips for creating names?

Author: a pre-generated name is entered at first, so I can rephrase to say to edit it

5. Select **Save**.

Additionally, you can create a custom visualization generated with a PPL query under [Event analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/event-analytics/) to fit your needs. The following image is an example of a visualization based on a PPL query.

![Metrics UI example 3]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics3.png)

You can save the visualization with the following steps:

> 1. Select **Save**.

Reviewer: From the ___ window (?)..., select Save. (I don't see save in the screen shot above so not sure where this step starts.)

Author: updated wording and updated the screenshot

> 2. You are then prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**.

Reviewer: same edits as above.

Reviewer: I would prefer that the save process is combined with the creation process, because I assume they wouldn't create a visualization unless they wanted to save it. You'd have to write steps for the create process, in that case.

Author: One is saving visualization from metric, while the other is saving from a PPL query. I have re-worded that to make it more clear

---
layout: default

> title: Prometheus and Metrics analytics

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: Prometheus and metrics analysis
```

nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/prometheusmetrics/
---

> # Prometheus and Metrics analytics

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Prometheus and metrics analysis
```

Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can ingest and visualize metrics data from the open-source [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) monitoring solution and from log data aggregated within OpenSearch, allowing you to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics. Previously, you could ingest and visualize only logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

> The following image shows the process of pulling in metrics ingested through Prometheus and visualizing them in a dashboard.

Author: yeah that will be fine. I'll make the change. thanks!

![Prometheus and Metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metricsgif.gif)

## Configuring a Prometheus data source connection to OpenSearch

You can view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards by first creating a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin. 

> To configure a connection to Prometheus for viewing metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards, create a file on your OpenSearch nodes named `datasources.json` containing the Prometheus data source settings. The following examples demonstrate the various Prometheus data source configurations using different authentication methods:

Author: multiple is correct if you have multiple

To create a visualization, do the following:

1. In the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** > **Available Metrics** select the metrics you would like to include in your visualization.
1. These visualizations can now be saved.
1. From the **Metrics analytics** window, select **Save**.
1. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the available options.
1. Optionally, you can edit the pre-defined name values under the **Metric Name** fields to fit your needs.
1. Select **Save**.

The image belows shows an example of the visualizations that are displayed in the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** window.

![Metrics UI example 2]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

## Defining PPL queries for use with Prometheus

You can define [Piped Processing Language]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) (PPL) queries against metrics collected by Prometheus. The following example shows a metric-selecting query with specific dimensions:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```

> Additionally, you can create a custom visualization generated with the following steps:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can create a custom visualization by performing the following steps:
```

1. From the **Events Analytics** window, enter your PPL query and select **Refresh**. The **Explorer page** is now displayed.
2. From the **Explorer page**, select **Save**.
3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the available options.

> 4. Optionally, you can edit the pre-defined name values under the **Metric Name** fields to fit your needs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Optionally, you can edit the predefined name values under the **Metric Name** fields to suit your needs.
```

5. Optionally, you can choose to save the visualization as a metric.
6. Select **Save**.

> Note: Only queries that include a time series visualization and stats/span can be saved as a metric, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: Only queries that include a time-series visualization and stats/span can be saved as a metric, as shown in the following image.
```
